[](%20http://inls161.johndmart.in%20) Tools for Information Literacy
============================== INLS161-001 (Summer II)
----------------------- [![](/images/silslogo.png)](http://sils.unc.edu)
INLS161-001 Summer II 2015 ========================== Course Info
----------- \*\*Description:\*\* Tools and concepts for information
literacy. Includes software use and maintenance, computer applications,
and networked information systems.\\ \*\*Instructor:\*\* [John D. Martin
III](mailto:john.d.martin.iii@unc.edu)\\ \*\*Location:\*\* 117 Manning
Hall (computer lab inside the SILS library)\\ \*\*Time:\*\* 1100 -
1230\\ \*\*Days:\*\* MoTuWeThFr\\ \*\*Dates:\*\* 22 June - 23 July
2015\\ \*\*Exam day:\*\* 27 July 2015 About the Course ----------------
INLS161 focuses on the concepts and tools necessary for communicating
information to users. This is a critical component of information
literacy, which involves seeking, evaluating, and utilizing information.
INLS151, titled "Retrieving and Analyzing Information," is focused on
the seeking and evaluating components of information literacy. This
course is about effective use and communication. \#\#\# Information
Literacy From the [American Library
Association](http://www.ala.org/ala/mgrps/divs/acrl/standards/informationliteracycompetency.cfm\#ildef):
\> Information literacy is a set of abilities requiring individuals to
\> 'recognize when information is needed and have the ability to locate,
\> evaluate, and use effectively the needed information.' The
technological component of information literacy is [also
defined](http://www.ala.org/ala/mgrps/divs/acrl/standards/informationliteracycompetency.cfm\#iltech):
\> Information literacy is related to information technology skills, but
\> has broader implications for the individual, the educational system,
\> and for society. Information technology skills enable an individual
to \> use computers, software applications, databases, and other \>
technologies to achieve a wide variety of academic, work-related, and \>
personal goals. Information literate individuals necessarily develop \>
some technology skills. A full information literacy curriculum would
include: - Tool literacy - The ability to use print and electronic
resources including software - Resource literacy - The ability to
understand the form, format, location and access methods of information
resources - Social-structural literacy - Knowledge of how information is
socially situated and produced. It includes understanding the scholarly
publishing process - Research literacy - The ability to understand and
use information technology tools to carry our research including
discipline-related software - Publishing literacy - The ability to
produce a text or multimedia report of the results of research \#\#\#
Tools and Concepts The course introduces some basic technology tools as
an essential component of information literacy training. We will cover
the following: - Operating on a remote system - Using version control
software to maintain your workflow - Manipulating and formatting
text-based documents - Processing data using spreadsheets - Processing
and storing data in databases - Developing presentation materials to
communicate your work effectively - Beyond! We will begin with the
building blocks of the Internet and the World Wide Web, to be certain we
understand what the our basic tools are doing for us. This will allow us
to better understand methods for creating well-formed materials to be
used on the Web. We will also introduce concepts and practice skills
relevant to effective use and understanding of the power built into the
tools listed above. You will have choices for how to complete each set
of tasks. Some may be familiar to you already while others may not. If
you already know how to use a given set of tools, it will behoove you to
learn a new set, thus increasing your technical skills. We will use
primarily Free and Open Source Software (F/OSS) when possible and
conduct and submit most of our work in open repositories online. \#\#\#
A Note on Computers This is a paper-free course. There will be no paper
products generated in this class and there is no printing requirement.
All work done in INLS161 will be done on computers either on your
personal laptop or on the desktop systems in the SILS lab. In most
cases, work will be done using web applications in such a way that you
might access your workspace from any computer, anywhere. It would
behoove you to bring your laptop to class every day as there will be
some hands-on-keyboards work done in every class period.
[About](/syllabus/) \\\> [Readings](/syllabus/readings/) \\\>
[Lectures](/syllabus/lectures/) \\\> [Lab](/syllabus/lab/) \\\>
[Evaluation](/syllabus/evaluation/) \\\>
[Assignments](/syllabus/assignments/) \\\> [Grading](/syllabus/grading/)
\\\> [Policies](/syllabus/policies/) [Home](http://inls161.johndmart.in)
=================================== - [Schedule](/schedule/) -
[Syllabus](/syllabus/) - [Reference Sheets](/refsheets/) Course Info
=========== \*\*Description:\*\* Tools and concepts for information
literacy. Includes software use and maintenance, computer applications,
and networked information systems.\\ \*\*Instructor:\*\* [John D. Martin
III](mailto:john.d.martin.iii@unc.edu)\\ \*\*Location:\*\* 117 Manning
Hall (computer lab inside the SILS library)\\ \*\*Time:\*\* 1100 -
1230\\ \*\*Days:\*\* MoTuWeThFr\\ \*\*Dates:\*\* 22 June - 23 July
2015\\ \*\*Exam day:\*\* 27 July 2015\\ \*\*Office hours:\*\* I will be
available for a half hour before and after our Lab sessions and also by
appointment.\\ \*\*Acknowledgements:\*\* I would like to thank Ron
Bergquist, upon whose course much of the content of this course is
based, as well as all of those who have taught this course over the
years since it was originated at SILS. \*\*Credits:\*\*This page was
generated by [GitHub Pages](https://pages.github.com) using a slightly
modified version of the [Architect
theme](https://github.com/jasonlong/architect-theme) by [Jason
Long](https://twitter.com/jasonlong).
[jekyll-architect-theme](https://github.com/pietromenna/jekyll-architect-theme)
is maintained by [pietromenna](https://github.com/pietromenna). Content
Â© John D. Martin III \\ [![Creative Commons
License](http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-sa/4.0/80x15.png)](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/deed.en\_US)\\
This work is licensed under a [Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 Unported
License](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/deed.en\_US) .
